What is Parallel Reduction?
Parallel Reduction is a technique in which multiple threads compute partial results independently and then combine them into a single final result using a binary operator like addition, minimum, or maximum.

Why do we use reduction in OpenMP?
We use reduction to avoid race conditions when multiple threads update the same shared variable. It ensures correct and safe computation.

What is a race condition?
A race condition occurs when multiple threads try to access and modify the same variable at the same time, causing unpredictable results.

What does this line mean?
#pragma omp parallel for reduction(+:sum)
It tells OpenMP to:
Run the loop in parallel.
Safely calculate the sum using the reduction operator +.

Why do we use reduction(min:min_val)?
It is used to find the minimum value in parallel safely without conflict between threads.

 Why do we initialize min with numeric_limits<int>::max()?
Because we want to find the smallest value.So we start with the largest possible integer value.

Why do we initialize max with numeric_limits<int>::min()?
Because we want to find the largest value.So we start with the smallest possible integer value.

Why do we use long long for sum?
To prevent overflow when the sum becomes very large.

 Why do we use static_cast<double> for average?
To avoid integer division and get accurate decimal results.

 What is the formula of average?
Average=Number of Elements/Sum	​

What is OpenMP?
OpenMP is an API used for parallel programming in C, C++, and Fortran. It helps in running code using multiple threads.

 What is the advantage of parallel reduction?
It improves performance by using multiple threads while ensuring correct results.

What happens if we do not use reduction?
It may cause wrong results due to race conditions.

What is the time complexity of this program?
Without parallelism: O(n)
With OpenMP: Still O(n), but execution time is reduced due to multiple threads.

What is Parallel Reduction?
Parallel Reduction is a technique in parallel programming where a large dataset is divided among multiple threads, each thread computes a partial result independently, and then all partial results are combined using a binary operator (such as addition, minimum, or maximum) to produce a final single result.
It is commonly used to compute operations like Sum, Min, Max, and Average efficiently.

 What mathematical properties must a reduction operator possess?
A reduction operator must be:
Associative Property
The grouping of operations does not change the result.
Example:

(a+b)+c=a+(b+c)
Binary Operation
It must combine two values at a time.
Identity Element
There must be a neutral starting value:
For Sum (+) → Identity is 0
For Min → Identity is INT_MAX
For Max → Identity is INT_MIN

These properties ensure correct parallel computation.

Difference between Sequential and Parallel Reduction (Time Complexity)
🔹 Sequential Reduction:
One thread processes all elements.
Time Complexity: O(n)
Execution is linear.
🔹 Parallel Reduction:
Multiple threads work simultaneously.
Time Complexity: O(n/p)
where p = number of processors/threads.
Faster execution when p > 1.

So, parallel reduction reduces execution time by dividing the workload.

What is a Race Condition, and how does Parallel Reduction avoid it?
🔹 Race Condition:
A race condition occurs when multiple threads try to update the same shared variable at the same time, leading to unpredictable or incorrect results.

Example:sum = sum + arr[i];

If multiple threads execute this simultaneously, the result may be wrong.

🔹 How Parallel Reduction Avoids It:
Each thread gets a private copy of the variable.
Threads compute their local results independently.
At the end, OpenMP safely combines them using the reduction operator.
This prevents data conflicts and ensures correct output.